# Project: Data Warehouse

## Purpose of the Project
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

## Project Description
Building an ETL pipeline that extracts Sparkify's data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for their analytics team to continue finding insights into what songs their users are listening to. Test database and ETL pipeline by running queries given by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare results with their expected results.

## Project Datasets
Two datasets that reside in S3. Here are the S3 links for each:

- Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data
- Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data
- Log data json path: s3://udacity-dend/log_json_path.json

**Song Dataset**
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are file paths to two files in this dataset.

- song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
- song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like:

{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}

**Log Dataset**
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

- log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
- log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json



## Description of Files

**create_tables.py** - This script will drop tables (if exist) and re-create new tables.
**etl.py** - This script executes load queries that extract JSON data from the S3 bucket and ingest them to Redshift.
**sql_queries.py** - This script contains variables with SQL statement in String formats, partitioned by CREATE, DROP, COPY and INSERT statement.
**dhw.cfg** - Configuration file used that contains info about CLUSTER, IAM_ROLE and S3
**Sparkify_DWH_Schema_ERD.svg** - file contains star schema design and stage tables
**test.ipynb** - file to test connections and other three py files


## Justification of database schema design and ETL pipeline
The star schema has 1 fact table (songplays), and 4 dimension tables (users, songs, artists, time). DROP, CREATE, INSERT, and SELECT queries are defined in sql_queries.py. create_tables.py uses functions create_database, drop_tables, and create_tables to create the database sparkifydb and the required tables.

<https://5d6a7afa601a44b2bc8337e41c8dee4b.udacity-student-workspaces.com/lab/tree/Sparkify_DWH_Schema_ERD.svg>

Extract, transform, load processes in etl.py populate the songs and artists tables. Created tables to store the data from S3 buckets. Loaded the data from S3 buckets to staging tables in the Redshift Cluster. Inserted data into fact and dimension tables from the staging tables.

## Song play example queries
Simple queries might include number of users with each membership level.
SELECT COUNT(level) FROM users;

Day of the week music most frequently listened to.
SELECT COUNT(weekday) FROM time;

Or, hour of the day music most often listened to.
SELECT COUNT(hour) FROM time;